So now that we can perform calculations
and just play the results,
it's time to move on and see how we
can get Python to make decisions and
also how to perform tasks repeatedly.
Unlike most programming languages
Python works in blocks of code,
and actually one of the design
principals of Python
was that it should be uncluttered and
easy to read.
Because of this Python's doesn't
use delimiters and blocks of code.
And so what I'm going to do is
show you what I mean by that, and
show you the Python solution.
So, I've opened up a new project, and I'm
going to create a new path and file, and
I'm going to call it Tabs, for
reasons that will become apparent shortly.
So firstly, let's just type in an example
in Python on how indentation works.
You saw this in the previous video,
we create a for loop.
So for i in range(1, 12 colon.
And notice when I press enter here,
it's automatically indented by Python.
So python has moved forward four letters,
or four spaces I should say,
so that when we start typing the next
part, it's actually indented.
So this is the concept of indenting.
And I'm just gonna finish typing this,
and I won't go through the code,
because we explained that and
went through that in the previous video
Okay, so and
if we actually run that we have the
answers that we saw in the previous video.
Now a point I wanna make though is
about the use of indentation and
using braces in other
programming languages.
For example with Java, you can type
something and you'd put if something.
And to do the same thing with indentation,
you actually put a brace like so,
and then you'd actually add another brace.
Now obviously we're getting
an error on the screen now,
because IntelliJ is saying,
well this is the valid path and code.
So the point I wanna make is that, you
have to actually denote the code block,
the code that you want executed in
the middle, by using something.
Something actually like a brace.
Well, the deleting this out now in
order to get rid of that error.
Python doesn't do that.
So what Python does, it's quite happy when
you actually start typing a statement,
it's gonna indent that for
you automatically.
It doesn't use delimiters around
the blocks of code, in other words.
Now if you actually delete the spaces,
you'll actually get an error.
So if I should delete those now,
we'll actually get an error on the screen.
Indent expected.
And that's because python is actually
saying, it needs at least one space
to know whether this is part of
the previous line's code in other words.
So in other words,
to indent it needs at least one space.
So we could go back up there and indent
that one space and it will be quite happy.
But generally speaking it will do it for
you.
So again, on the previous line you
still want to start a topping.
When I pressed enter there, it
automatically indented it four spaces, and
if I press delete now I can get that
other code back up there on the screen.
Now both IntelliJ and
Idol make it easy for you by doing that in
default indention when appropriate,
and then also continue the indention.
So if we come back to the end of the line
here, pressed enter, notice that it knows,
because of you're already in an indented
line, it's assuming that you don't need to
be indented again, and we can actually
start topping from that point.
So in other words it's handling a lot
of that for you automatically, and
also pressing backspace,
moves the indent when you're finished
entering the code for a block.
In other words, you can go there.
So if you're on the next line there,
and let's just say you decided,
well, you're gonna need
a little more code.
You wanna go back and
print another statement.
If I press backspace now, I'll go back
automatically four spaces as you saw there
to the start line,
I can actually start typing again.
Now you might be asking, now what
is this block you're talking about?
Well, Python actually
referred to that as being
a piece of Python program text
that is executed as a unit.
So in the example above, you can actually
say that print itself was a call to
the printer method to be more precise,
is a block.
Now we could have included some extra
lines at the same level of indentation,
and they'd become part of the same block.
So in other words, you could actually
start typing, print, calculation complete.
Try again, for example.
All of these are actually part,
in this case, of the same block.
The reason for that is they're at
the same level of indentation.
Now when we get to the point in this
course where we're defining our own
functions or methods,
the body of the function is a block, and
that may in turn contain other blocks.
Now we actually need some more complex
code examples to demonstrate this fully,
so what I'm going to do now is finish by
showing you some of the preferences in
IntelliJ to do with tabs, and then in the
next lecture we'll start getting into some
more complex code examples.
So if you actually want to change
the level of tabs or spaces
the way to do it is to go into Preferences
IntelliJ so I'm going to select that.
Preferences and we can go into Editor.
And because we've actually installed
the Python plug-in you should
actually see that.
So, let me go into General and
scroll down into Code Style.
We can actually see Python,
so I'm gonna select python.
Once I've actually done that, so
again that's Editor, Code Style,
Python is how to get to it.
You'll notice here that
we've actually got tab size.
The python folder is showing
you that the tab size is 4.
And what that means is if
you press the tab key, and
that's to get this little indentation,
if you do that yourself,
every time you do that's gonna add
four spaces for you automatically.
Now if you click on
this Use tab character,
what will happen if we do that,
notice how this has changed now and
it's flashing to show you that now
this is actually a tab character.
So what that saying is instead of actually
adding four spaces for you, it's actually
gonna add the tab character itself for
you if that's what you wanna do.
So you can play around with this,
you can change the level of indentation,
you can get yourself a little
bit of difficulty doing that.
If you do find that things aren't working.
Come here back in editor,
code style python, click on reset, or
just make sure that your tab size and
indent is both set to 4.
And optionally you can leave that on, but
I'll probably suggest that
you actually leave it off.
And what that means is that IntelliJ will
automatically be adding spaces, as and
when you actually need them.
So, that's what you need to do
if you do get in any difficulty.
And just to confirm how that works again.
Because we added four,
every time I press Tab,
you could see I'm going four characters.
And that's because we've specified four
in the preferences that the number of
characters that were gonna move forward.
And just one final note.
You don't wanna get into the situation
where you're mixing spaces and
tabs when you're indenting blocks.
And the reason for
it is it can get in the difficulty and
it can get a little bit confusing.
And IntelliJ does a pretty
good job at that.
So if you do do that, chances are, it's
gonna fix that and correct that for you.
But if you're bringing in source code or
editing in another environment and
then bring it into IntelliJ you might
run into a bit of difficulties, and
you may have to re-fix things up.
Also the other thing to keep in mind is,
you come up here to Code.
Try doing reformat code.
That can actually help you
if you actually select that.
That will often actually fix errors.
So if you've got some weird
sort of formatting and
things not working, go into other
option and click reformat code and
that can get you out of
difficulties as well.
So that's it for this video,
short, sharp, and shining.
In the next one, as I mentioned,
we're gonna move on to some more
complex examples of how this all works.
And specifically we're gonna start
looking at the if statements.
So I'll see you in that next video.